# Coding Camp: The Fundamentals of Omics Data Analysis

## Summary

Welcome to the Coding Camp -- Fundamentals of Omics Data Analysis Mini
Course! In this course, we'll cover the basics of common statistical
tests used in metabolomics research. But that's not all! Doing
statistics well means being able to recognize key assumptions, define
and use appropriate tests, get data in a format that's amenable to the
test you want to do, and be able to visualize the results in an
interesting and meaningful way. We're going to learn this in the context
of metabolomics data, but I encourage you to get creative in how these
skills also relate to questions you ask in your research area of
interest and even everyday life.

## Intended Audience

• Students interested in learning the basics of R • Students new to
omics-level data analysis

## Course Layout

• Anticipated time commitment: 2 hours/week for class + 1-2 hours/week
for preparation materials • Class time once a week • Come prepared by
reading assigned articles/watching assigned videos---turn in 1-3
questions you have from the material at the beginning of class • Class
structure o Begin with discussion of common questions from the pre-class
materials o Brief lecture and description of goals for the period o Work
time in breakout groups on assigned worksheet o Report out from groups

## Learning Objectives

1.  Define common data quality checks and univariate statistical tests
    used in metabolomics
2.  Use basic R coding language to write common data quality checks,
    univariate statistical tests, and pathway analysis
3.  Work as a group to conduct a basic analysis of a sample metabolomics
    data set

## List of Topics

• Common statistical approaches and assumptions • Basic R coding •
Preparing metabolomics data for statistics • Basic statistics in R •
Making figures in R • Pathway analysis

## Course Materials

• Review articles • Video lectures • Rmd worksheets

## Projects and Assessments

• Homework assignments to practice R coding • No assessments • Pre- and
post-class survey

## Schedule

### Week 1 Intro to Course and Basic R Coding

Coding Lecture: 01_Intro to R Coding

Content Lectures: - Welcome to Class - What is "Omics"? - How to Find
Public Data - Common R Logic - Notebooks Hub Setup

Resources: - R for Beginners - Interpretation of Omics Data Analysis

Assignment: Rmd worksheet on basic R commands

### Week 2 Making Figures

Coding Lecture: 02_making figures

Content Lectures: - basics of making figures

Resources: - ggplot cheat sheet

Assignment: Rmd worksheet on making figures

### Week 3 Data Preparation and Quality Control -- Filtering

Coding Lecture: 03_data_filtering

Content Lectures: - Types of QC samples - How to use for loops and
apply()

Resources: - Current practices in LCMS quality control

Assignment: Rmd worksheet on data filtering

### Week 4 Data Preparation and Quality Control -- Stats-Ready Manipulations

Coding Lecture: 04_data_manipulations

Content Lectures: - What is PCA - What different data manipulation steps
do

Resources: - review of common data manipulations

Assignment: Rmd worksheet on data manipulations

### Week 5 Univariate Approaches in Metabolomics

Coding Lecture: 05_univariate stats

Resources: - cheat sheet of common stat terms and tests Rmd worksheet on
univariate tests

Week 6 Pathway Analysis Coding Lecture: 06_pathway analysis

Content Lectures: - Basics of pathway analysis - Using the RaMP-DB GUI -
Basics of enrichment analysis - Optional: magrittr pipe explanation

Resources: - bioinformatics annotations resources

Assignment: Rmd worksheet on RaMP-DB pathway analysis
